Frequently Asked Questions during admission to M.Tech. Program


Gaurav Bhatnagar

Chairman, Admissions Committee
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
N.H. 65, Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur 342030
Phone: (91 291) 280 1457
eMail: admission@iitj.ac.in


IITJ – Location & Campuses
 (Q1) 	How to reach IIT Jodhpur?
 	IIT Jodhpur is located on the outskirts of  the city of Jodhpur and is well connected to other parts of country by road, rail and air. The Institute is located on National Highway 65 at Karwad Village, about 24 km from the railway station and 25 km from the airport; it takes approximately 45 mins and 40 mins to drive from airport and railway station to the Institute, respectively.
 	Jodhpur is connected well by road, rail and air to all major cities in the country, and by mega highways to major neighbouring cities, e.g., Jaipur, Jaisalmer, Udaipur and Ahmedabad.
 	 	 1. 	It is connected by rail to major cities in the country, like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, Kota, Kanpur, Ahmedabad, Indore, Bhopal, Jabalpur, Guwahati, Nagpur, Lucknow and Jaipur;
 	 	 2.	There are daily flights from Delhi and Mumbai to Jodhpur. Air India and Jet Airways operate the daily flight to each of these cities; and
 	 	 3.	Jodhpur is connected by mega-highway to major neighbouring cities, e.g., Jaipur, Jaisalmer, Udaipur and Ahmedabad. Deluxe and express buses ply to Jodhpur from Delhi, Jaipur, Ahmedabad and Baroda.

 	Reaching IIT Jodhpur:   
 	(a) 	From Airport to Campus
 	You can take a prepaid auto/taxi to the Institute, which is situated on National Highway 65, Nagaur Road, Karwad. You may ask the driver to go past Mandore on Nagaur Road. This Campus is about 25 km from the airport.
 	(b)	From Railway Station to Campus
 	At Jodhpur Junction Railway Station, exit from Platform No.1 side. You can take a prepaid auto/taxi to the Permanent Campus of IIT Jodhpur, which is situated on National Highway 65, Nagaur Road, Karwad. You may ask the driver to go past Mandore on Nagaur Road. This Campus is 24 km from the Station.
 	 	 	 
 (Q2) 	When IITJ is going to shift to its permanent campus?
 	IIT Jodhpur will shifting during May-June 2017 to its sprawling state-of-the-art residential permanent campus on 852 acres of land located about 20 km away from the center of the city of Jodhpur on National Highway 65 towards Nagaur, N-NE from the center of Jodhpur. The Permanent Campus of the Institute is the first fully-planned technical institute campus in India.
 	 	 	 
 (Q3)	Once I reach IIT Jodhpur for admissions, will IIT Jodhpur provide accommodation for my parents also?
 	Students who are going to take admission in IIT Jodhpur will be provided accommodation. But, their parents or accompanying persons have to stay outside. Jodhpur has a number of reasonably priced private guest houses and hotels.


Hostels & Facilities
(Q1)	What kind of hostel facility will be provided in IIT Jodhpur?
 	Student will be provided with hostel room . The room will be air-cooled, and have basic furniture (table, chair, bed and almirah) and Internet connection. The hostel (of 236 rooms) will have a gymnasium, a games room, a TV room, a music room, and a reading room. The Dining Hall caters to 1000 students. It will have separate vegetarian and non-vegetarian kitchens and dining areas, along with a generic food court.

(Q2)	How is hostel allocation done?
 	The allocation of hostels is done under the supervision of the Chairman, Wardens Committee.
 	There is a separate hostel for girls.

(Q3)	What facility will be there in my hostel room?
 	Each room in the hostel is equipped with basic facilities like fan, light, almirah,  bed,  table and chair.

(Q4)   	What essential things should I bring?
 	Apart from clothes, personal items, and study material, you are advised to bring a mattress, pillow, bucket, mug, etc. Alternately, you can buy them locally.

(Q5) 	Can I bring any personal electrical items?
 	No. You cannot bring any of the electric items, like water heaters, iron, table fan, and electric stove, for your personal use. Use of any such equipment in hostel rooms is strictly prohibited.

(Q6)	Am I allowed to bring my bike/car to the campus?
 	No. Use of motorised bike/scooter/car by students is prohibited on the campus. But, you can have a bicycle on campus.

(Q7)	I do not have a laptop yet. Is a computing facility available?
 	The Institute runs a Computer Center with desktop computers for students use as a regular facility. You can use the same.

(Q8)   	Jodhpur city being very hot during summers, will coolers be provided in the hostels?
 	The hostel rooms in the Permanent Campus of IIT Jodhpur are air cooled. Hence, no personal coolers are permitted in the hostel rooms.

(Q9)	In case of an issue with electricity or fixtures or water or services in hostel rooms, what should I do?
 	Please contact the Staff Members in the Hostel Office, register your complaint. Attempts will be made to resolve the issue within 24 hours.

(Q10)	Do you have necessary facilities like a post office, banks, canteen and others at your Institute?
 	
The campus of IIT Jodhpur is well guarded and equipped with basic amenities including Wi-Fi, recreational rooms and a computer center. Presently, the campus provides accommodation for Faculty Members and Officers. Development of residential facility is underway for the Staff Members of the Institute. Transport facility is available between the Institute and various places in Jodhpur City. Following are some basic facilities made available on campus:
(a) 	ATM & Bank: The residential area has a branch of State Bank of India (SBI) as well as an ATM of SBI enabling students to make transactions with ease..
(b)	Food Court: There is a Food Court in the Campus. It provides hygienic food, fresh juices and various other snacks till late hours in the night.
(c)	Gymnasium: A well-equipped gymnasium is present on campus, which is operational during 5 am to 10 pm. Students can avail this facility to stay healthy and to maintain his/her physique.
(d)	Dining Service: Dining Service is available on the Campus. The Dining Hall offers good quality food, regularly monitored by the Wardens for hygiene and nutritional values, and provided at affordable cost.
(e)	Shops: A shopping complex catering to the various primary needs of students are available on Campus.
(f)	Transport Services: The Institute has a bus service running between the Institute and various places in the City of Jodhpur at regular intervals.
(g)	Entertainment Room: Every hostel consists of recreation facilities (like TV Rooms, where students can enjoy matches and watch movies) along with indoor games (like table tennis).

(Q11) 	What about medical facilities?
 	The campus has a primary Health Center for providing routine health services to the patients round the clock. Also, the Institute has its ambulance services available round-the-clock.
 	Besides the Health Center, the Institute has empanelled six hospitals in the city of Jodhpur, namely:
(1) ASG Eye Hospital, Jodhpur
(2) Goyal Hospital & Research Centre, Jodhpur
(3) Kamla Nagar Hospital, Jodhpur
(4) Medipulse Hospital, Jodhpur
(5) Vasan Eye Care Hospital, Jodhpur
Two of these hospitals have specializations in ophthalmology, one in orthopedic, and the remaining three hospitals are the best known general purpose hospitals in the city. For specialized medical attention, doctors at our Health Center refer patients to one of these hospitals. In addition to these six hospitals, the city has a Medical College and three hospitals run by Government of Rajasthan. Also, the city has an All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Jodhpur. Besides, there is Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Ayurved University, which runs academic programs and a hospital, in our neighbourhood. Also, the Institute has constituted a Medical Board consisting of Senior Doctors from the Medical College and the AIIMS; advice is taken for enhancement of medical services of the Health Centers, and in critical medical cases further, IIT Jodhpur has empaneled two hospitals in Jaipur. These two hospitals are accredited by National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & Healthcare, and patients can be referred to these hospitals as per the need of the treatment.
 	In case of requirement of medical treatment or any health issue, please contact the Hostel Staff and report to the Health Center. Doctors and Nursing Staff are available in the Health Center, round-the-clock.

(Q12)	How to get a medical booklet and why is it mandatory?
 	The medical booklet will be provided to the students at the time of registration. This booklet is mandatory to receive treatment at the Institute Health Centers, because it provides an official record of the medical history of the student, which will enable the student to receive right and better treatment.

(Q12)	What about availability of counselling services to overcome any emotional or stress issues?
 	The Institute has an active Student Counselling Services team. Also, the Institute has arrangements with the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur whose professional psychological services are availed.

(Q13)	What are security arrangements on the campus?
 	Campus of IIT Jodhpur is secured throughout the day. The Institute has round-the-clock, dedicated, professional security arrangement on Campus. Also, every hostel is manned with one security guard. Entry and exit are registered of each visitor.
 	Girls Hostel has a separate entrance and is manned by female security guards. Besides, for girl students, there is a functional Women Cell. In case of any matters related to harassment or insecurity, Convenor of the Women Cell can be contacted.

Campus Life @ IITJ
 (Q1) 	How is the campus life for Students?
 	IIT Jodhpur offers plenty of opportunities for the holistic development of Students. Apart from intensive academics with regular classes, assignments and quizzes, Students are encouraged to pursue extra-curricular activities of their choice throughout the year. Two major festivals are organized every year with active participation from hundreds of students form colleges across the nation. Thus, students can prove their mettle and nurture their talent. In addition, everyday life at the Institute has plenty of scope for fun, joy and learning.
 	Besides, students are also encouraged to participate in co-curricular activities to further their all-round personality development. Also, extracurricular activities at the Institute include participation in Science and Technology, Photography, Sports, Music, Astronomy, and Films. The activities are divided under seven societies of the Students Gymkhana, which organizes these activities. These societies fulfil the varied interests of Students and contribute to their holistic development. These societies are:
 	(1) Sports & Games Society,
(2) Cultural & Literary Society,
(3) Design & Arts Society,
(4) Science & Technology Society,
(5) Academics & Careers Society,
(6) Campus Life Society, and
(7) Elected Representatives Society.
 

Registration & Academic Session
 (Q1) 	What about registration? What items need to be brought and what are the procedures?
 	Basically, you have to bring originals and copies of all the necessary certificates like Bachelors Degree Certificate, GATE Score Card, proof of address, identity proof, caste/domicile certificate (whichever is applicable), sufficient number of passport size photographs.

(Q2) 	After admission into M.Tech. Program, can I change my branch?
 	No. No changes are admissible after joining the Program.

 (Q3)	Where to find course structure for different programs?
 	You can find the curriculum and course structure of different programs offered by the Institute at their respective pages as below.
 	 	1. M.Tech. in Bioscience & Bioengineering,
2. M.Tech. in Computer Science & Engineering,
3. M.Tech. in Electrical Engineering, and
4. M.Tech. in Mechanical Engineering.

 (Q4)	What is the pattern of Academic Sessions in IIT Jodhpur?
 	Each academic year (July to June) consists of two academic semesters. Each semester is for about sixteen (16) weeks with one week of recess for students, making it about 15 working weeks in each semester. Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at least 70. Normally, Semester I (Odd Semester) commences in the fourth week of July and closes in the last week of November. Semester II (Even Semester) commences in the last week of December starts closes in the last week of April.
 	The Academic Calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic Session, such as orientation, registration, commencement of classes, adding and dropping of courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, conversion of Incomplete grades, vacation, and mid-semester recess. This calendar is approved by the Senate of the Institute and displayed in the Institute website much before the commencement of the academic semester.


Academic & Research Facilities
 (Q1) 	What Academic Facilities are available at IIT Jodhpur? 
 	IIT Jodhpur has established state-of-the-art teaching and research laboratories. These laboratories have advanced equipment and instrumentation of international standard, which are used extensively in teaching and research. The major laboratories include Heat Transfer, Fluid Mechanics, Electronic Circuit Laboratory, Robotics, Electro Mechanical Energy Conversion Laboratory, and Solar Radiation.
 	The Library of the Institute has a collection of about 10,000 volumes of books comprising of textbooks, research and reference books, monographs, etc. In addition, the Library provides access to a range of electronic resources from professional and scholarly societies and publishers, such as American Society for Mechanical Engineers, Institute for Electrical & Electronics Engineers, and Association for Computing Machinery. Also, it subscribes to popular scientific, research and archival databases, like SciFinder, MathSciNet, JStor, Prowess, and EBSCO Academic Search. The Library operates in a computerized environment with automated member & circulation services, and digital library services. Memberships, circulation, reference & information service, inter-library loans & document lending services, current awareness service, and digital library service, are some of the important services that are presently offered. Visit http://library.iitj.ac.in for more information.
 	IIT Jodhpur is building close relations with select international universities, research institutes and corporations. For example, Memoranda of Understanding have been signed with the University of Waterloo, the University of Western Ontario in Canada, and the Universitat Rovira i Virgili (Tarragona, Spain). These MoUs allow for short-term exchange of Students and Faculty Members.

(Q2) 	What research opportunities are available for M.Tech. students? 
 	IIT Jodhpur offers two-year M.Tech. Programs in three branches, namely:
 	 1. Bioscience and Bioengineering,
 2. Computer Science & Engineering,
 3. Electrical Engineering, and
 4. Mechanical Engineering.

 (Q3) 	Is any financial assistance available?
 	Ministry of Human Resources Development (MHRD) provides assistantships to registered M.Tech. Students. Currently, it is Rs. 12,500 per month. In return, students should put 8-hours/week of Teaching Assistantship to assist the Faculty Members in the conduct of courses ongoing in each semester.


Internships & Placements
 (Q1) 	What are the efforts made by the Institute towards Student Placements? 
 	The Office of Student Placement provides assistance to students towards placements and internships. It bridges the gap between companies and students, and organizes the placement process in an orderly and efficient manner, with the intent of developing a long-lasting and mutually beneficial relationship with the companies. Training sessions on grooming the skills of the students to make them fit to face the world are organized. The prime focus of the Office is to act as an interface between the students and the corporate world, to facilitate a smooth transition from academic life to professional life. The Office builds relationship with companies through social networking and industrial visits. Some renowned companies that visit IIT Jodhpur are Microsoft, Amazon, Google, Cisco, Hacker Rank, Tata Motors, Mahindra, L&T, Havells, JSW, DE Shaw, Morgan Stanley, and Mu Sigma, and Public Sector Undertakings like Coal India, HPCL, and DRDO.
