Frequently Asked Questions during admission to B.Tech. Program
Welcome to the section on Frequently Asked Questions. Some of the common questions that concern a Student seeking admission to B.Tech. Program at IIT Jodhpur are addressed here, and are pertaining to the following categories:
  (A)	 IITJ – Location & Campuses,
  (B)	 Hostels & Facilities,
  (C)	 Campus Life @ IITJ,
  (D)	 Registration & Academic Session,
  (E)	 Academic & Research Facilities, and
  (F)	 Internships & Placement.
 	 
For further queries, please contact the following.
For admissions related to B.Tech.:
Sandeep Kumar Yadav
Chairman, Admissions Committee (JEE)
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
N.H. 62, Nagaur Road,Karwar
Jodhpur 342030
Phone: (91 291) 280 1354
eMail: admission@iitj.ac.in
 	 
For student activities related:
Samanwita Pal
Associate Dean (Students)
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
N.H. 62, Nagaur Road,Karwar
Jodhpur 342030
Phone: (91 291) 280 1031 
eMail: ad_students@iitj.ac.in
 	 
For hostel related:
Ramesh K. Metre
Chairperson, Student Hostel Warden Committee
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
N.H. 62, Nagaur Road,Karwar
Jodhpur 342030
Phone: (91 291) 280 1309
eMail: ccw@iitj.ac.in

IITJ – Location & Campuses
 (Q1) 	How to reach IIT Jodhpur?
 	IIT Jodhpur is located on the outskirts of the city of Jodhpur and is well connected to other parts of the country by road, rail and air. The Institute is located on National Highway 62 at Karwad Village, about 24 km from the railway station and 25 km from the airport; it takes approximately 45 mins and 40 mins to drive from airport and railway station to the Institute, respectively.
 	Jodhpur is connected well by road, rail and air to all major cities in the country, and by mega highways to major neighbouring cities, e.g., Jaipur, Jaisalmer, Udaipur and Ahmedabad.
 	 	 1. 	It is connected by rail to major cities in the country, like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, Kota, Kanpur, Ahmedabad, Indore, Bhopal, Jabalpur, Guwahati, Nagpur, Lucknow and Jaipur;
 	 	 2.	There are daily flights from Delhi and Mumbai to Jodhpur. Air India and Jet Airways operate the daily flight to each of these cities; and
 	 	 3.	Jodhpur is connected by mega-highway to major neighbouring cities, e.g., Jaipur, Jaisalmer, Udaipur and Ahmedabad. Deluxe and express buses ply to Jodhpur from Delhi, Jaipur, Ahmedabad and Baroda.

 	Reaching IIT Jodhpur:   
 	(a) 	From Airport to Campus
 	You can take a prepaid auto/taxi to the Institute, which is situated on National Highway 62, Nagaur Road, Karwad. You may ask the driver to go past Mandore on Nagaur Road. This Campus is about 25 km from the airport.
 	(b)	From Railway Station to Campus
 	At Jodhpur Junction Railway Station, exit from Platform No.1 side. You can take a prepaid auto/taxi to the Permanent Campus of IIT Jodhpur, which is situated on National Highway 62, Nagaur Road, Karwad. You may ask the driver to go past Mandore on Nagaur Road. This Campus is 24 km from the Station.

 	 	 	 
 (Q2) 	Once I reach IIT Jodhpur for admission, will IIT Jodhpur provide accommodation for my parents also?
 	Students who are going to take admission in IIT Jodhpur will be provided accommodation. But, their parents or accompanying persons have to stay outside. Jodhpur has a number of reasonably priced private guest houses and hotels.


Hostels & Facilities
(Q1)	What kind of hostel facility will be provided in IIT Jodhpur?
 	Student will be provided with  hostel room . The room will be air-cooled, and have basic furniture (table, chair, bed and almirah) and an internet connection. The hostel (of 236 rooms) will have games, TV and reading rooms. The Dining Hall Building will have separate vegetarian and non-vegetarian kitchens and dining areas, along with a generic food court.

(Q2)	How is hostel allocation done?
 	The allocation of hostels is done under the supervision of the Chairman, Student Hostel Warden Committee. There  are two separate hostels for girls
 	

(Q3)	What facility will be there in my hostel room?
 	Each room in the hostel is equipped with basic facilities like fan, light, almirah, bed,  table , chair and an Air Cooling unit.

(Q4)   	What essential things should I bring?
 	Apart from your clothes, personal items, and study material, you can bring your mattress, pillow, bucket, mug, etc. or can buy them locally.

(Q5) 	Can I bring any personal electrical items?
 	No. You cannot bring any of the electric items, like water heaters, iron, table fan, table lamp, and electric stove, for your personal use. Use of any such equipment in hostel rooms is strictly prohibited.

(Q6)	Am I allowed to bring my bike/car to the campus?
 	No. You cannot bring motorbikes/scooter/car to the campus. But, you can have a bicycle on campus. Persons with special needs may be permitted to use their own vehicle based on the request.

(Q7)	I do not have a laptop yet. Is a computing facility available?
 	The Institute runs a Computer Center with desktop computers for student’s use as a regular facility. You can use the same. There are some financing schemes which can be availed to procure a laptop.

(Q8)   	Jodhpur city being very hot during summers, will coolers be provided in the hostels?
 	The hostel rooms in the IIT Jodhpur are air cooled. Hence, no personal coolers are permitted in the hostel rooms as there is no need of the same.

(Q9)	 Do you have the necessary facilities at your Institute Campus?
 	
The campus of IIT Jodhpur is equipped with basic amenities including Wi-Fi, recreational rooms and a Computer Center. Presently, the campus provides accommodation for Faculty Members,Officers and Staff Members of the Institute. 

Following are some basic facilities made available on campus:

(a) ATM & Bank: The residential area has a branch of State Bank of India (SBI) and Canara Bank as well as an ATM of SBI and Canara Bank each for the ease of students.

(b) Dining Service: Dining Service is available on the Campus. The Dining Hall offers good quality food, regularly monitored by the Wardens for hygiene and nutritional values, and provided at affordable cost.

(c)  Food Court: There is a Food Court in the Campus. It provides hygienic food, fresh juices and various other snacks till late hours in the night. (The Food Court is temporarily not operational due to COVID-19 Pandemic) 

(d) Veg and Non-Veg Mobile Caravan: There is a Veg Mobile Caravan which provided snacks and juices. Also, there is a separate Non-Veg Mobile Caravan on the campus to facilitate the students. 

(e) Gymnasium: A well-equipped gymnasium is present on campus, which can be accessed round the clock

(f) Sport Facility: Physical recreation through games and sports has been an important part of the Institute since its inception.Thus, at IITJ we actively encourage the students to participate in various sports and games, for which good facilities (Synthetic Track, Football Field, Hockey, Tennis Court, Basketball Court, Cricket Practice Pitch with nets and Cricket Ground with three pitches) are made available to the students.

(g) Shops: A shopping complex catering to the various primary needs of students are available on Campus.

(h) Transport Services: The Institute has a bus service running between the Institute and various places in the City of Jodhpur at regular intervals. (The bus services are temporarily not operational due to COVID-19 Pandemic)

(i) Entertainment Room: Every hostel consists of recreation facilities (like TV Rooms, where students can enjoy matches and watch movies) along with indoor games (like table tennis, badminton, chess etc).




(Q10)	What about medical facilities?
 	
The residential campus has a Primary Health Center for providing routine health services. It provides services to the patients round the clock. In addition to the availability of medical service at the residential campus, the Institute has an ambulance service available round-the- clock. Besides, the Institute has empanelled 7 hospitals in the city of Jodhpur, namely:

(1) ASG Eye Hospital, Jodhpur,

(2) Goyal Hospital & Research Centre, Jodhpur,

(3) Heart & General Hospital, Jaipur,

(4) Kamla Nagar Hospital, Jodhpur,

(5) Medipulse Hospital, Jodhpur,

(6) Vasundhara Hospital, Jodhpur.

(7) Shri Ram Hospital, Jodhpur (Under process) and

(8) Yash Aman Hospital, Jodhpur(Under process)

One of these hospitals, namely ASG Eye Hospital has specializations in Ophthalmology, Kamla Nagar Hospital in Orthopaedics, and Goyal Hospital & Research Centre and Medipulse Hospital are the best known general hospitals in the city. For specialized medical attention, doctors at Primary Health Center refer patients to one of these hospitals. In addition to these Seven hospitals, the city has a Medical College and 3 hospitals run by the Government of Rajasthan. The Institute has close ties with All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Jodhpur. Also, the Institute has constituted a Medical Board consisting of Senior Doctors from the Medical College and the AIIMS; advice is taken periodically on quality of medical services at the Primary Health Center, and in critical medical cases. Further, IIT Jodhpur has empanelled two hospitals in Jaipur, which are accredited by the National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & Healthcare, and patients can be referred to these hospitals as per the need of the treatment. Primary Health Centre  has both Out-Patient and In-Patient services. Also, the Institute provides personal accidental insurance to the students and to one of their fee paying parents or guardians.

(Q11) 	What about the availability of counselling services to overcome any emotional or stress issues?
 	The Institute has a Student Well being Committee, dedicated Counsellors and  Well being moderator available in the campus. 24 x 7 Text based, chat mode, counselling sessions are also available in the campus. Also, the Institute has arrangements with the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Jodhpur whose professional psychological services are available.

(Q12)	What are security arrangements on the campus?
 	
Campus of IIT Jodhpur is secured throughout the day. The Institute has round-the-clock, dedicated, professional security arrangement on Campus. Also, every hostel is manned with security guards. Entry and exit are registered for each visitor.

         Girls Hostel has a separate entrance and is manned by female security guards. Besides, for girl students, there is a functional Women Cell. In case of any matters related to harassment or insecurity, Convenor of the Women Cell can be contacted. There is an Internal Complaints Committee which deals with the complaints of sexual harassment in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court of India.



Isolation facilities
 (Q1) 	 Who can avail the isolation Facility?
 	Students who are willing to return to the campus may apply for the Isolation facility after getting the approval students may avail the facility.
 (Q2) 	 How to apply to avail the isolation facility?
 	The students can apply through a google form which is available on the Institute’s website.
 (Q3) 	 What kind of hostel facility will be provided at Isolation in IIT Jodhpur?
 	Each student will be provided with a separate hostel room (~80 sq ft) along with basic furniture (table, chair, and bed) and an internet connection. Separate vegetarian and non-vegetarian packed food packets (breakfast, lunch and dinner) (on payment basis) will be provided at the doorstep of the hostel rooms.
 (Q4) 	 Time period for stay at Isolation facility?
 	All the students will have to undergo self-isolation in their respective rooms for a period of 10 days from the date of reporting the Institute. Movement of the students is restricted to their rooms during self-isolation period.
 (Q5) 	 Preparatory before Joining the Institute?
 	Each student after their arrival will go through thermal screening and bag sanitization at the entrance of IITJ. The screen shot of the Arogya Setu App page showing status of the student needs to may be shown at the main gate.
 (Q6) 	 What essential things should I bring?
 	Multiple Bedsheets, Pillow, A 5-liter water bottle, Electric kettle (If required), Packed dry food (snacks, biscuits etc.) as per their requirement (for the isolation period).
 (Q7) 	 COVID-19 Test?
 	COVID-19 test for the isolated students will be conducted by AIIMS on 4 or 5 day of their isolation period with the permission of the Competent Authority.
 (Q8) 	 What about after completion of the Isolation period?
 	After completion of the 10th day each student staying in the isolation facility will visit PHC for health checkup and will then be allowed to enter their respective hostels with the continuing use of masks, hand sanitizer and maintaining social distancing while accessing common areas.
 (Q9) 	 What after non-compliance of any of the above mentioned guidelines?
 	In case of non-compliance of any of the above mentioned guidelines by any student, the same will be informed to the competent authority, and monetary penalty / disciplinary action may be initiated.



Campus Life @ IITJ
 (Q1) 	How is the campus life for Students?
 	
IIT Jodhpur offers plenty of opportunities for the holistic development of Students. Apart from intensive academics with regular classes, assignments and quizzes, Students are encouraged to pursue extra-curricular activities of their choice throughout the year. Two major festivals are organized every year with active participation from hundreds of students from colleges across the nation. Thus, students can prove their mettle and nurture their talent. In addition, everyday life at the Institute has plenty of scope for fun, joy and learning.

Besides, students are also encouraged to participate in co-curricular activities to further their all-round personality development. Also, extracurricular activities at the Institute include participation in Science and Technology, Photography, Sports, Music, Astronomy, and Films. 

IIT Jodhpur organizes a number of distinct  Intra-Institute level events, workshops and conferences throughout the year. The subdivisions include the following:-

 	
IGNUS- Cultural-Social festival of IIT Jodhpur.
Prometeo- Technical festival of IIT Jodhpur.
Aaftaab- Literary festival of IIT Jodhpur.
VARCHAS- Sports festival of IIT Jodhpur.
VIRASAT- a SPIC MACAY festival is a cultural extravaganza to celebrate the variety and richness of Indian Cultural Heritage.
NIMBLE- Nimble, the intra-college technical fest provides a platform to the techno buds of the Institute to show their hidden talent.
Institute also organises the following Inter-Institute level events:

  SPANDAN- Spandan is the intra-institute cultural fest of IIT Jodhpur.
  Framed- Annual Art Exhibition of IIT Jodhpur.



Registration & Academic Session
 (Q1) 	What about registration? What items need to be brought and what are the procedures?
 	Basically, you have to bring originals and copies of all the necessary certificates, JEE (Main & Advanced) Score cards, proof of address, identity proof, caste/domicile certificate (whichever is applicable), at least two passport size photographs.

(Q2) 	After admission into B.Tech. Program, can I change my branch?
 	
(a) An undergraduate student is eligible to apply for branch change at the end of the second semester only, provided the student satisfies the following criteria: 


Secured a CGPA, at the end of the second semester, of: i. Greater than or equal to 7.0 for SC/ST and PD applicants ii. Greater than or equal to 8.0 for other applicants
Completed all prescribed course credits for the first two semesters (including the non-graded courses). 
No backlog at the end of the second semester. 
(b) The student should have no disciplinary action against him/her. 

(c) Change of the branch will be permitted strictly in the order of merit as determined by CGPA at the end of the second semester. Each available seat may be occupied by students of any category. For students of SC/ST/PD category, concession in eligibility criteria is given as per rule (a). 

(d) In case more than one student applying for branch change have the same CGPA, the tie shall be resolved on the basis of JEE ranks of such applicants. 

(e) In making a change of branch, the strength of a branch should not fall below 85% of the actual strength and should not go above 115% of the sanctioned strength. 

(f) The conditions mentioned in item (a) above will not be insisted upon for change to a branch in which a vacancy exists with reference to the sanctioned strengths, and the concerned student was eligible as per JEE Rank for admission to that branch at the time of entry to IIT Jodhpur.

 (g) Notwithstanding any of the conditions listed above, a student with CGPA of 9 or more at the end of the second semester will be allowed to move to a branch of his/her choice

 (Q3)	Where to find course structure for different programs?
 	You can find the curriculum and course structure of different programs offered by the Institute at their respective pages as below.
 	 	
B.Tech. in Bioengineering
B.Tech. in Computer Science & Engineering,
B.Tech. in Electrical Engineering,
B.Tech. in Mechanical Engineering,
B.Tech. in AI and Data Science
B.Tech. in Chemical Engineering
B.Tech. in Materials Engineering,
B.Tech. in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering


 (Q4)	What is the pattern of Academic Sessions in IIT Jodhpur?
 	
The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer term as per the following timelines: 

Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November 

Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April 

Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July. 

Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at least 70.

 	The Academic Calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic Session, such as orientation, registration, commencement of classes, adding and dropping of courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, conversion of Incomplete grades, vacation, and mid-semester recess. This calendar is approved by the Senate of the Institute and displayed in the Institute website much before the commencement of the academic semester.



Academic & Research Facilities
 (Q1) 	What Academic Facilities are available at IIT Jodhpur? 
 	IIT Jodhpur has established state-of-the-art teaching and research laboratories. These laboratories have advanced equipment and instrumentation of international standard, which are used extensively in teaching and research. The major laboratories include Heat Transfer, Fluid Mechanics, Electronic Circuit Laboratory, Robotics, Electro Mechanical Energy Conversion Laboratory, and Solar Radiation.
 	The Library of the Institute has a collection of about 12,000 volumes of books comprising of textbooks, research and reference books, monographs, etc. In addition, the Library provides access to a range of electronic resources from professional and scholarly societies and publishers, such as American Society for Mechanical Engineers, Institute for Electrical & Electronics Engineers, and Association for Computing Machinery. Also, it subscribes to popular scientific, research and archival databases. The Library operates in a computerized environment with automated member & circulation services, and digital library services. Memberships, circulation, reference & information service, inter-library loans & document lending services, current awareness service, and digital library service, are some of the important services that are presently offered. Visit http://library.iitj.ac.in for more information.
 	IIT Jodhpur is building close relations with select international universities, research institutes and corporations. For example, Memoranda of Understanding have been signed with the University of Waterloo, the University of Western Ontario in Canada, and the University at Rovira i Virgili (Tarragona, Spain). These MoUs allow for short-term exchange of Students and Faculty Members.
 (Q2) 	Is any financial assistance available?
 	
The IITJ facilitates scholarships and financial aids through numerous ways to its students. The Office of Students encourages and assists the students to apply and being awarded scholarships like National and State SC/ ST schemes like NSP, Top Class etc; Fee Remission to SC/ST students, CSIR/UGC/MHRD grants and other scholarships. 

National Scholarship Portal (NSP)-one-stop solution through which various services starting from student application, application receipt, processing, sanction and disbursal of various scholarships to Students are enabled. National Scholarships Portal is taken as Mission Mode Project under National e-Governance Plan (NeGP).
Central Sector Scholarship Scheme for Top Class Education for SC/ST students- This scholarship is provided to the meritorious students belonging to the SC/ST category. Facilities like tuition fees waiver, living expenses, books and a computer. 
Fee Remission- Tuition fee remission and tuition fee waiver will be given as per the Ministry of Education regulations (F. No. 24-2/2016-TS-1, dated 08 April 2016) to the eligible students. 
The SC/ST/PH students shall get complete fee waiver 
The most economically backward students (whose family income is less than 1 lakh rupees per annum) shall get full remission of the fee.  
The other economically backward students (whose family income is between 1 lakh to 5 lakh rupees per annum) shall get remission of 2/3rd of the tuition fee.
All students shall have access to interest free loan under the Vidyalaxmi scheme for the total portion of the tuition fee payable.
Students can also apply through various loan from banks under education loan schemes.



Internships & Placements
 (Q1) 	What are the efforts made by the Institute towards Student Placements? 
 	The prime role of Office of Student Placements is to bridge the gap between the industry leaders of today, and the budding leaders of tomorrow. It will continuously be engaged in inviting companies to our campus and will make rigorous effort to build long term relationship with the organization. The activities of the office are strengthened to provide career planning services which aims to create an encouraging atmosphere for students by providing them ample reminders to build competencies in sync with their dream careers, thereby ensuring their smooth landing into the professional world. Also, it will sensitize students in best possible way by promoting them to take responsibility for their own career decision and prepare themselves for the industry. Thus, it will provide services and resources that assist students in their ongoing efforts of competence developing, career planning and employer searching. The office has to enhance the Employability Quotient of students by mapping the shortcomings in their attitude, skills and knowledge, and by polishing the soft skills through various career development and training programs.
 	
Training and Career Development programs are organized for grooming students with skills needed to face the real world. This year sessions organized were based on: 

a) General career counselling by renowned faculties from other IITs to make students aware with different career prospects and corresponding entry level requirements right from the beginning. This will help students immensely in the careful evaluation of individual strength, and the suitability of a work option.

b) Organizing grooming/soft skills sessions by professionals. The major areas to improve within the realm of soft skills are improving facets of personality, sharpen verbal and written communication skills, learning corporate etiquettes, learning interview skills, handling group discussions, writing customized resume, honing leadership and teamwork skills.

The Office builds and expands relationship with companies through social networking and industrial visits. Some renowned companies, like ISRO, L&T, Maruti, TVS, Bosch, Mahindra & Mahindra, VE Commercials, Microsoft, Amazon, DE-Shaw, Barclays, etc. visit IIT Jodhpur for internship and placements.